{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Quirxacsi, urdoymasa, rona iey poyvini texa, reyes iu reyi, squeyrey ippirx decretu: Heycossa hiusangarda glij\'e1ut ann titeyvinuc iey on quiupey. Rulu it\'edu, on yispi ioy soltistoy, Heycossa heun\'e9yt yanu uyjuyu av nouvoy iey, piules ambares av graunoy ney quirmey, diu buy regimentus av ronay, filmasos ad murvinu on Quirxacsi ioy quiroy. Mirsti av ippirvinoy ployausoy queubreyeyt tinques slayvavanos diu repara\'e7onos fissivanos.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 ==== Introduction\
\
Hey there, and welcome to this (rather messy still) draft of 1050 AD Carite. It\'92s not pretty enough just yet and this torch was basically an attempt to see how it works so I can change it to my liking. I hope you enjoy regardless!\
\
==== Lexicon\
\
(N: noun, A: adjective, Nu: numeral, P: preposition, V: verb)\
\
ad: P - to (movement, by extension goal) [with direct case], at [with dative case]\
ambari: N (m iotic \uc0\u948 ) - vessel, amphora (historically)\
ann: P - against, than (in comparatives), for (a reason) [all with dative case]\
-ausa: A (thematic \uc0\u945 ) - derivational suffix implying possession of a quality\
av: P - from, of (partitive usage) [all with dative case]\
buy: Nu (irregular) - two\
decretu: N (m thematic \uc0\u948 ) - decree\
diu: and\
filim: V (athematic resonant \uc0\u948 ) - I rear, I educate, I train\
fiss: V (thematic \uc0\u948 ) - I increase, I enlarge\
glij: V (thematic \uc0\u948 ) - I punish\
grauna: N (m thematic \uc0\u945 ) - grain\
heun: V (thematic \uc0\u948 ) - I sacrifice, I offer\
Heycossa: N (f thematic \uc0\u945 ) - given name (/hei\u815 'kosa/ [he\u618 \u815 'kos\u593 ])\
hiusangarda: N (f iotic \uc0\u945 ) - kingdom\
ippirim: V (athematic vocalic \uc0\u948 ) - I bring, I deliver\
ippirvinu: N (m thematic \uc0\u948 ) - delivery\
it\'edu: N (m thematic \uc0\u948 ) - year\
mirsti: N (f iotic \uc0\u948 ) - failure\
murvinu: N (m thematic \uc0\u948 ) - fight, battle\
ney: or\
nouva: N (m thematic \uc0\u945 ) - gold\
on: P - into [with direct case], in [with dative case]\
-oym: V (athematic vocalic \uc0\u948 ) - factitive derivational suffix\
piuli: A (iotic \uc0\u948 ) - much (singular), many (plural)\
ployu: N (m thematic \uc0\u948 ) - time\
poyvini: N (m iotic \uc0\u948 ) - shepherd, metaphorically: leader of a group\
queybreym: V (athematic vocalic \uc0\u948 ) - I cause\
quirmi: N (m iotic \uc0\u948 ) - beer\
Quirxacsi: N (m iotic \uc0\u948 ) - given name (/kir'\u643 aksi/ [k\u618 \u638 \'92\u643 \u593 ks\u618 ])\
quiru: N (m thematic \uc0\u948 ) - army, military\
quiupi: N (m iotic \uc0\u948 ) - war\
regimentu: N (m iotic \uc0\u948 ) - regiment\
repara\'e7ona: N (f thematic \uc0\u945 ) - reparation\
reyi: N (m iotic \uc0\u948 ) - king, ruler\
rona: N (f thematic \uc0\u945 ) - people (often translated as \'93men\'94 in English)\
rulu: A (thematic \uc0\u948 ) - each (singular), every (singular), all (plural)\
slauv: V (thematic \uc0\u945 ) - I seize, I plunder, I ransack, I loot (secondary stem: slayv-)\
soltistu: N (m thematic \uc0\u948 ) - solstice\
squeyri: A (iotic \uc0\u948 ) - clear, translucent\
texa: A (thematic \uc0\u945 ) - sacred, divine, holy\
tinqui: N (f iotic \uc0\u948 ) - earth, land\
titeyvinu: N (m thematic \uc0\u948 ) - deed, action\
urdu: A (thematic \uc0\u948 ) - high\
uyjuyu: Nu (thematic \uc0\u948 ) - eighth\
yanu: Nu (thematic \uc0\u948 ) - one\
yispi: N (m iotic \uc0\u948 ) - summer\
\
==== Grammar\
== Nominals\
Nouns have an inherent gender (masculine or feminine), with which adjectives agree. Both also decline for number (singular/plural) and case (direct/dative). Numerals function like adjectives. Fractions, when combined with a partitive, agree in gender with the partitive - e.g., in the mock sentence \'93one third of gold\'94, if \'93gold\'94 is masculine, \'93one\'94 and \'93third\'94 take masculine forms. Adjectives practically always follow the nominal they accompany. Articles don\'92t exist and definiteness is contextual.\
\
The paradigm system may seem complicated at first, but is actually relatively straightforward. There are two main categories, thematic and iotic. Both are divided into a paradigm per gender, which is subdivided into the default paradigm (\uc0\u948 ) and its alpha equivalent (\u945 ). Any noun inherently belongs to a very specific paradigm while adjectives logically fluctuate in gender - however, thematic/iotic and default/alpha is fixed per word. Below, you may find the declension table for the relevant paradigms:\
\
MASCULINE THEMATIC \uc0\u948 \
direct: -u (sg), -us (pl)\
dative: -oy (sg), -uc (pl)\
\
FEMININE THEMATIC (\uc0\u948  & \u945 )\
direct: -a (sg), -os (pl)\
dative: -ay (sg), -ap (pl)\
\
MASCULINE THEMATIC \uc0\u945 \
direct: -a (sg), -os (pl)\
dative: -oy (sg), -ap (pl)\
\
MASCULINE IOTIC (\uc0\u948  & \u945 ) and FEMININE IOTIC\
direct: -i (sg), -es (pl)\
dative: -ey (sg), -ic (pl)\
\
FEMININE IOTIC \uc0\u945 \
direct: -a (sg), -os (pl)\
dative: -ey (sg), -ic (pl)\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The irregular declension of the numeral two is irrelevant here, as its dictionary form (direct plural) is the one used in the text.\
\
== Pronouns\
I still need to properly fix the pronouns (finally), but only the possessive pronouns are used in this text:\
ioy (masculine singular)\
iey (feminine singular)\
iu (plural)\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 These possessive pronouns agree in number and gender with the owner. They may appear both before and after a word, depending on if the owner is explicitly mentioned:\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}when following a word, it gives information about the word that precedes it, e.g. gold.SG 3SM.POSS would be \'93his gold\'94;\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}when preceding a word, it is preceded by an explicit owner: Jasper.DIR 3SM.POSS gold.SG would be \'93Jasper\'92s gold\'94.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
== Verbs\
Verbs are without a doubt the most complicated aspect here, owing to their large conjugational tables. Like nominals, verbs are divided into two main classes, being thematic and athematic, where athematic is split further into vocalic and resonant. These three paradigms are further divided into default (\uc0\u948 ) and alpha (\u945 ). The TAM system is reasonably complicated: an indicative mood, divided into active and passive voices reflecting present, preterite and future (all also conjugating person and number) as well as a subjunctive mood, featuring the same active/passive split but simplifying tenses into non-past and past. Imperatives also exist, while infinitives are lacking. As the above text does not use subjunctives nor imperatives, these will be left out. Four participles exist, reflecting both present/past and active/passive. While a massive table would be enjoyable, only the forms used by the text are included for everyone\'92s convenience (except for the participles, which are all included and behave like adjectives). Dictionary forms reflect the indicative active 1sg present. If a secondary stem exists, it is used for the passive.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 THEMATIC \uc0\u948 \
act ind pres 1sg: -\'d8\
act ind pres 3sg: -\'edx\
act ind fut 3sg: -\'e9yt\
pas ind fut 3sg: -\'e1ut\
\
part act pres: -indi (iotic \uc0\u948 )\
part act past: -usu (thematic \uc0\u948 )\
part pas pres: -ivana (thematic \uc0\u945 )\
part pas past: -umasa (thematic \uc0\u945 )\
\
ATHEMATIC RESONANT \uc0\u948 \
act ind pres 1sg: -im\
act ind pres 3sg: -x\
act ind fut 3sg: -seyt\
pas ind fut 3sg: -seytu\
\
part act pres: -indi (iotic \uc0\u948 )\
part act past: -du (thematic \uc0\u948 )\
part pas pres: -vana (thematic \uc0\u945 )\
part pas past: -masa (thematic \uc0\u945 )\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 ATHEMATIC VOCALIC \uc0\u945 \
act ind pres 1sg: -m\
act ind pres 3sg: -x\
act ind fut 3sg: -eyt\
pas ind fut 3sg: -eytu\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 part act pres: -ndi (iotic \uc0\u948 )\
part act past: -su or -ju (thematic \uc0\u948 )\
part pas pres: -vana (thematic \uc0\u945 )\
part pas past: -masa (thematic \uc0\u945 )}